Getting Started With Gestalt
============================

This will walk you through creating a simple twitter clone from scratch using
Gestalt.



#### Prerequisites:

You will need [Node](https://nodejs.org/), [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/), and
[PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) installed, and should have postgres
running.


#### 1) Install gestalt-cli

`npm install --global gestalt-cli`

`gestalt-cli` is a module that will help you scaffold new projects and run
database migrations.  Installing it globally with npm will allow you to use
the `gestalt` command on the command line.


#### 2) Create your database

`createdb blogs`

We will need a PostgreSQL database for our app to connect to.  You can create
one with the `createdb` command.  Let's name it 'blogs'.


#### 3) Create a new Gestalt project:

`gestalt init blogs`

This will create a new directory `blogs`, install `gestalt-server`,
`gestalt-postgres`, and a few other necessary modules, and create the
boilerplate files for a simple express app running a GraphQL API.

The Gestalt CLI will prompt you for a database url.  Because we already created
a database matching the name of our project (`'blogs'`), you can just hit enter
to use the default url (`'postgres://localhost/blogs'`).


#### 4) Edit schema.graphql

`gestalt init` will have created a simple `schema.graphql` file with an object
type named 'Session'.

```graphql
type Session {
  id: ID!
}
```

We will use `Session` later, but for now let's ignore it and just add some types
to our schema to represent users and posts:

```graphql
type Session {
  id: ID!
}

type User implements Node {
  id: ID!
  email: String! @unique
  passwordHash: String! @hidden
}

type Post implements Node {
  id: ID!
  text: String!
  createdAt: Date!
}
```

This adds a type named `User` to our schema with fields `id` and `email`.  We
added the `@unique` directive to email to tell the database to enforce its
uniqueness, and the `@hidden` directive to the `passwordHash` field to create a
column in the database, but *not* a field in our GraphQL schema.


#### 5) Run database migrations: `cd your-project` and `gestalt migrate`

When you run `gestalt-migrate` in the root directory of your project, Gestalt
reads the existing database schema, compares it to what is defined in
`schema.graphql`, and generates a migration to update the database.  This
migration will add any new tables or columns (it avoids dropping anything for
safety), and you can have the cli run it directly or write it to a file.

After our additions to `schema.graphql`, `gestalt migrate` will ask to confirm
our database url, and then generate and print the following SQL migration:

```SQL
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS "pgcrypto";

CREATE TABLE users (
  seq SERIAL NOT NULL UNIQUE,
  id uuid PRIMARY KEY,
  email text NOT NULL UNIQUE,
  password_hash text NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE posts (
  seq SERIAL NOT NULL UNIQUE,
  id uuid PRIMARY KEY,
  text text NOT NULL,
  created_at timestamp without time zone NOT NULL
);
```

A couple things are going on here - first Gestalt needs to add the `'pgcrypto'`
extension in order to generate uuids (I'll explain more about this later), and
then we are creating tables for the two types we added, `users` and `posts`.

Looking first at the `users` table, the email and password hash columns are
straightforward. We can see that the `email` column is `UNIQUE` because we added
the `@unique` directive, and that both of the columns have type `text`
corresponding to `String` in our GraphQL schema.

The `id` and `seq` columns are a little more surprising.  You might expect a
single column `id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY` for the `id` field.  Instead `id` has
type `uuid`, and we have an additional column `seq` with type `SERIAL`.

The reason we use UUIDs for node ids is that it lets us query nodes by id
without needing to define extra permission checks.  UUIDs generated by
`pgcrypto` are securely random, so users will only be able to see nodes we
deliberately expose to them.

And then because our ids are random, we include the `seq` column to record the
order that rows were created so that we can order them chronologically.

You can type `'yes'` to run the migration, and then `'no'` to skip writing it to
a file.  At this point, you should be able to start the server and explore your
schema in the GraphiQL IDE.  Run `npm start` and navigate to
`localhost:3000/graphql`.


#### 6) Add the `AUTHORED` relationship between users and posts:

We will also want to record the author of each post, and be able to see all of
the posts that any user authored.  We can add this to our schema using the
`@relationship` directive.

```graphql
type Session {
  id: ID!
}

type User implements Node {
  id: ID!
  email: String! @unique
  passwordHash: String! @hidden
  posts: Post @relationship(path: "=AUTHORED=>")
}

type Post implements Node {
  id: ID!
  text: String!
  createdAt: Date!
  author: User @relationship(path: "<-AUTHORED-")
}
```

Here we have added the `posts` field to the `User` type, and the `author` field
to the `Post` type.

Gestalt will look at the `@relationship` directives on these fields, and match
them because they have the same label, `AUTHORED`, and point in opposite
directions.

The 'fat' arrow using the `=` character on the `posts` field indicates that the
field is plural (a user can author many posts) and the 'skinny' arrow (using
`-`) on the `author` field indicates that `author` is singular.

Gestalt can figure out that best way to represent this 'one to many'
relationship is to add a foreign key to the `posts` table referencing `users`
and storing the id of its author.

After making these changes to `schema.graphql`, run `gestalt-migrate` again. It
will create the following migration:

```SQL
ALTER TABLE posts ADD COLUMN authored_by_user_id uuid;

CREATE INDEX ON posts (authored_by_user_id);
```

We can see that it's adding the foreign key column we expect,
`authored_by_user_id`, and adding an index on it.  Type `'yes'` to run the
migration.  After running it, if you restart your server you should see the
`posts` field on `User` and `author` field on `Posts` show up in GraphiQL.

One thing you will notice is that the type of the `posts` field on `User` is
`PostsConnection` and not `Post`.  Gestalt creates
[connection and edge types](https://facebook.github.io/relay/graphql/connections.htm)
types for fields with plural `@relationship` directives to allow pagination.


#### 7) Add the `FOLLOWED` relationship between users:

The next relationship to add is `FOLLOWED`.  Users can follow and be followed by
many other users.

```graphql
type User implements Node {
  ...
  followedUsers: User @relationship(path: "=FOLLOWED=>")
  followers: User @relationship(path: "<=FOLLOWED=")
 }
```

To represent this 'many to many' relationship, Gestalt will need to create a
join table with columns for `user_id` and `followed_user_id`.  Because the
unique constraint on the table implies an index on `user_id`, Gestalt only needs
to create an index on `followed_user_id`.

```
CREATE TABLE user_followed_users (
  user_id uuid NOT NULL REFERENCES users (id),
  followed_user_id uuid NOT NULL REFERENCES users (id),
  UNIQUE (user_id, followed_user_id)
);

CREATE INDEX ON user_followed_users (followed_user_id);
```


#### 8) Add the `feed` field to `User`:

We use a final relationship to create the `feed` field - a list of all the posts
authored by users that a user follows.  We can express this really succinctly
with the arrow syntax.

```graphql
type User implements Node {
  ...
  feed: Post @relationship(path: "=FOLLOWED=>User=AUTHORED=>")
 }
```

Gestalt understands that our schema already accommodates this relationship, so
it won't add any tables or columns.


#### 9) Add a `gravatar` field to `User` with custom resolution

So, what if we have a field that needs some custom resolution?  Maybe we want to
return the url for a [gravatar](http://en.gravatar.com/) image based on a user's
email address.

First, we will add the `profileImage` field to our user type.  We can use the
`@virtual` directive to make sure that it will be included in the GraphQL
schema, but *not* result in a column being added to the database.

```
type User implements Node {
  ...
  profileImage: String! @virtual
}
```

Now that we have the field, we can define custom resolution.  To do it, we
create a file `User.js` in the `objects` directory.  Everything in objects will
be imported automatically by the code in `server.js`.

```javascript
import crypto from 'crypto';

export default {
  name: 'User',
  fields: {
    // get a user's gravatar image url using their email address
    profileImage: (obj, args, ctx) => {
      const email = obj.email.toLowerCase();
      const hash = crypto.createHash('md5').update(email).digest('hex');
      return `//www.gravatar.com/avatar/${hash}`;
    },
  },
};
```

Here we export an object with two properties. The first, `name` is the name of
the type we want to define resolution for.  The second `fields` is an object
where the keys match names of fields on your type, and values are GraphQL
resolution functions.

To create a Gravatar url, we lowercase the user's email and take its md5 hash.
We return it interpolated into a string, and thats it!  If you restart the
server, you should see the `profileImage` field show up in GraphiQL.


#### 10) Add `currentUser` to the `Session` type

OK - so we have a working API that will users and posts from our database.  The
next step is to allow users to sign in and out.

Remember the `Session` type we were going to come back to?  This is where it
comes in.  In addition to querying nodes by ID, we can add fields to `Session`,
and resolve them based on values we store in a session cookie.

Let's add a `currentUser` field to `Session`.

```
type Session {
  id: ID!
  currentUser: User
}
```

Because `Session` is not stored in the database, we will need to define custom
resolution for any fields we add to it.  Gestalt will have already created a
`Session.js` file for us inside the `objects` directory, so we can just add the
resolver for `currentUser`.

When a user signs in, we will set their id on the session as `currentUserID`.
We will write code for this next, but for now let's just assume it will be set
when a user is signed in.

First we will check if it has been set - if it has not, there is no
`currentUser` and we can return null.  Otherwise, we find the user by id from
the database using `context.db.findBy`.

```javascript
export default {
  name: 'Session',
  fields: {
    id: () => '!',
    currentUser: (obj, args, context) => {
      if (obj.currentUserID == null) { return null; }
      return context.db.findBy('users', {id: obj.currentUserID});
    },
  },
};
```


#### 9) create `SignIn` and `SignOut` mutations

To actually set (and remove) `currentUserID` from the session object, we use
mutations.  Mutations depend on the types we have defined in `schema.graphql`,
so they are defined as a function that receives an object mapping all of the
types in our schema by name.

The function returns a [graphql-relay-js](//github.com/graphql/graphql-relay-js#mutations)
mutation config.  The only change to the graphql-relay-js API is that
inputFields and outputFields can accept types directly.

To log in, we expect `email` and `password` as input strings, and we will output
the updated `Session`.  We query for the user by id, compare the hashed
password to the input using `bcrpyt`, and then update `currentUserID` and return
the session.

If the db threw an error because no row matched `email`, or if `bcrypt` threw
one because the passwords didn't match, we catch the error and return a
descriptive message.


```javascript
import bcrypt from 'bcrypt-as-promised';

export default types => ({
  name: 'SignIn',
  inputFields: {
    email: types.String,
    password: types.String,
  },
  outputFields: {
    session: types.Session,
  },
  mutateAndGetPayload: async (input, context) => {
    const {email, password} = input;
    const {db, session} = context;

    try {
      const user = await db.findBy('users', {email});
      await bcrypt.compare(password, user.passwordHash);
      session.currentUserID = user.id;
      return {session};
    } catch (e) {
      throw 'Email or password is invalid';
    }
  },
});
```

To sign out, we just set the session ID to null and return.

```javascript
export default types => ({
  name: 'SignOut',
  inputFields: {},
  outputFields: {
    session: types.Session,
  },
  mutateAndGetPayload: (input, context) => {
    const {session} = context;
    session.currentUserID = null;
    return {session};
  },
});
```

#### 10) create `SignUp` and `CreatePost` mutations

```javascript
import bcrypt from 'bcrypt-as-promised';
import assert from 'assert';

export default types => ({
  name: 'SignUp',
  inputFields: {
    email: types.String,
    password: types.String,
  },
  outputFields: {
    session: types.Session,
  },
  mutateAndGetPayload: async (input, context) => {
    const {email, password} = input;
    const {db, session} = context;

    assert(email.match(/.+@.+?\..+/), 'Email is invalid');
    assert(password.length > 5, 'Password is invalid');

    const passwordHash = await bcrypt.hash(password, 10);
    const user = await db.insert('users', {
      email,
      passwordHash,
    });

    session.currentUserID = user.id;
    return {session};
  },
});
```

```javascript
import assert from 'assert';

export default types => ({
  name: 'CreatePost',
  inputFields: {
    title: types.String,
    text: types.String,
  },
  outputFields: {
    user: types.User,
  },
  mutateAndGetPayload: async (input, context) => {
    const {title, text} = input;
    const {db, session} = context;
    const {currentUserID} = session;

    assert(title.length > 0, 'Posts must have titles');
    assert(text.length > 0, 'Posts must have text');

    const user = await db.findBy('users', {id: currentUserID});

    const post = await db.insert('posts', {
      createdAt: new Date(),
      authoredByUserID: currentUserID,
      title,
      text,
    });

    return {user};
  },
});
```

#### 11) Create `FollowUser` and `UnfollowUser` mutations

```javascript
export default types => ({
  name: 'FollowUser',
  inputFields: {
    userID: types.ID,
    follow: types.Boolean,
  },
  outputFields: {
    user: types.User,
    currentUser: types.User
  },
  mutateAndGetPayload: async (input, context) => {
    const {follow, userID} = input;
    const {db, session} = context;
    const {currentUserID} = session;
    const followedUserID = userID.split(':')[1];

    if (follow) {
      await db.exec(
        'INSERT INTO user_followed_users (user_id, followed_user_id) ' +
        'VALUES ($1, $2);',
        [currentUserID, followedUserID]
      );
    } else {
      await db.deleteBy(
        'user_followed_users',
        {userId: currentUserID, followedUserID}
      );
    }

    const currentUser = await db.findBy('users', {id: currentUserID});
    const user = await db.findBy('users', {id: followedUserID});

    return {currentUser, user};
  },
});
```

#### 12) Create a front end

This step is beyond the scope of this walkthrough..  Now that you have a
complete API you could build a frontend (or many!) on any platform(s) you like.

If you want to take a look at an example frontend built using React and Relay,
you can [find one here](//github.com/charlieschwabacher/gestalt/tree/master/packages/blogs-example).
